A transformation of power grids is taking place in order to address sev-
eral concerns: reduction of dependency on fossil fuels; improvement

of efficiency; liberalisation of markets and reduction of GreenHouse
Gas emissions, amongst others. This transformation may involve the
massive introduction of electrical vehicles, renewable energy sources,
distributed energy generation and storage, etc.
The introduction of these technologies requires an increased flexibility
of power grids to balance supply and demand. Nowadays, the balance
between supply and demand is adjusted by modifying the production
side. However, the idea for future power grids is to make the demand

side flexible. To this end, a monitoring and controlling layer is be-
ing implemented in distribution power grids. This is a new paradigm

known as Smart Grid.
Making demand more flexible requires the implementation of policies
that manage the modification of this demand. These policies must be
studied before their implementation since real testing is difficult on
vital infrastructure such as the power grid. Policies can be studied
through “in silico” experiments, also known as simulations. These
simulations are normally carried out using a complex system based
approach so that all consuming devices are represented.
The study of large Smart Grids as a complex system is challenging.
The objective of these policies is to modify the demand in accordance
to the grid state. Therefore, it is necessary that each decision maker
acts by considering the actions of other decision makers to achieve the
objective. This means, the behaviour each decision maker implements
must consider the environment and possible interactions before acting.

The definition of a policy is refined using an iterative trial and error
procedure. At each iteration, the policy must be defined, experimented
and analysed. In these steps, the complexity has to be dealt with. On
the one hand, there is the complexity of modelling and simulating the
millions of heterogeneous elements that compose the power grid. On
the other hand, the analysis of huge quantities of data coming from the
simulations. In addition, there is the implementation of the policy in
the decision makers which are heterogeneous and numerous.

This research work is devoted to explore the application of methodo-
logies or formalisms to deal with these problems. Specifically, Model

Driven Engineering, Business Intelligence and Swarm Intelligence are
explored. Model Driven Engineering has been applied to the problems
of complexity when dealing with modelling and simulation of large
power grids. Business Intelligence methodologies have been explored
for the analysis of huge quantities of heterogeneous data coming from

large-scale simulations. Swarm Intelligence techniques have been ap-
plied to implement demand side control mechanisms.

The usefulness of these methodologies or formalisms to deal with the
problems of Smart Grids cannot be fully verified. This means, it is
not possible to validate that they are useful in all the Smart Grid case
studies. However, case studies can be carried out to check whether
they are useful or not. For this reason, in this research, several case
studies based on real problems have been carried out.
The results of the application of the methodologies or formalisms in
these real case studies have been positive since they reduced the time
needed to carry out policy experiments. Model Driven Engineering

has been useful in dealing with the engineering of simulators for large-
scale models. Business Intelligence methodologies have been used to

analyse data coming from simulations. They have demonstrated to be
useful for providing a fast, multidimensional querying. The application
of Swarm Intelligence techniques have also been shown to be useful for
dealing with decentralised decision making.
In Agent-based Modelling and Simulation (ABMS), a system is modelled as a collection
of agents, which are autonomous decision-making units with diverse characteristics. The
interaction of the individual behaviours of the agents results in the global behaviour of the
system. Because ABMS offers a methodology to create an artificial society in which actors with
their behaviour can be designed and results of their interaction can be observed, it has gained
attention in social sciences such as Economics, Ecology, Social Psychology, and Sociology.
In Economics, ABMS has been used to model many strategic situations. One of the popular
strategic situations is the Public Goods Game (PGG). In the PGG, participants secretly choose
how many of their private money units to put into a public pot. Social scientists can conduct
laboratory experiments of PGGs to study human behaviours in strategic situations. Research
findings from these laboratory studies have inspired studies using computational agents and
vice versa. However, there is a lack of guidelines regarding the detailed development process
and the modelling of agent behaviour for agent-based models of PGGs. We believe that this
has contributed to ABMS of PGG not having been used to its full potential.
This thesis aims to leverage the potential of ABMS of PGG, focusing on the development
methodology of ABMS and the modelling of agent behaviour. We construct a development
framework with incorporated software engineering techniques, then tailored it to ABMS of

PGG. The framework uses the Unified Modelling Language (UML) as a standard specifica-
tion language, and includes a simulation development lifecycle, a step-by-step development

guideline, and a short guide for modelling agent behaviour with statecharts. It utilizes software
engineering methods to provide a structured approach to identify agent interactions, and design
simulation architecture and agent behaviour. The framework is named ABOOMS (Agent-Based
Object-Oriented Modelling and Simulation).
After applying the ABOOMS framework to three case studies, the framework demonstrates
flexibility in development with two different modelling principles (Keep-It-Simple-Stupid vs.
Keep-It-Descriptive-Stupid), capability in supporting complex psychological mechanisms, and
ability to model dynamic behaviours in both discrete and continuous time. Additionally, the
thesis developed an agent-based model of a PGG in a continuous-time setting. To the best of
our knowledge such agent-based models do not exist. During the development, a new social

preference, Generous Conditional Cooperators, was introduced to better explain the behavioural
dynamics in continuous-time PGG. Experimentation with the agent-based model generated
dynamics that are not presented in discrete-time setting. Thus, it is important to study both
discrete and continuous time PGG, with laboratory experiment and ABMS. Our new framework
allows to do the latter in a structured way.
With the ABOOMS framework, economists can develop PGG simulation models in a
structured way and communicate them with a formal model specification. The thesis also
showed that there is a need for further investigation on behaviours in continuous-time PGG.
For future works, the framework can be tested with variations of PGG or other related strategic
interactions.
